---
layout:     post
title:      "Dawn of the New Everything by Jaron Lanier"
subtitle:   "A Review"
date:       2017-12-15 12:00:00
author:     "Abigail Monson"
header-img: "dawnukus.jpg"
---


Dawn of the New Everything: Encounters with Reality and Virtual Reality by Jaron Lanier, a review.

This review goes all over the place, sorry not sorry.

    Throughout his book, Jaron Lanier switches between autobiographical chapters and technical chapters that explain important aspects of VR. In one of his technical chapters, Jaron tries to define what virtual reality is, in a nutshell. I think that his 9th definition of VR and his brief musings on the imperfections of science in the related footnote to that definition, apply to the Intro to Philosophy course at Mt. San Antonio College that I'm taking, taught by Professor David Lane. Well, I mean, the whole book applies to the course, but this part especially! "Ninth VR Definition: The investigation of the sensorimotor loop that connects people with their world and the ways it can be tweaked through engineering. The investigation has no end, since people change under investigation." Just like particles change when they are measured or observed! Science is not perfect and virtual reality is not perfect. Virtual reality is a verb, not a noun. It is chasing after a simulated reality, or approaching an ideal reality that can never quite be reached. Sad maybe, but as Lanier puts it, realistic.\
    Lanier became obsessed with the painting The Garden of Earthly Delights by Hieronymus Bosch after coming across it in a book one day in an elementary school classroom as a child. Pretty graphic images for a child to be consuming, says my inner monologue. I was raised religiously, sometimes I'm accidentally a prude. Anyways, I'm pretty sure that the brilliant technological genius and martyr, Edmond Kirsch, from the book Origin by Dan Brown was also obsessed with the painting and had a copy of it in his apartment, or maybe even the original, if I'm remembering correctly. Robert Langdon was sure that the password to his computer would have some tie to the painting. Wait, is this a Dan Brown review or a Jaron Lanier review? Are all technological philosophers, real or fictional, obsessed with The Garden of Earthly Delights? What is "real"? Who knows? These multiple references to the painting caused me to spiral down into my own obsessive pit. I read the entire Wikipedia page on the masterpiece, which only took a couple of minutes, but then I couldn't stop reading reviews. Three hours later, I'm back to writing my own review, but not of the painting. Although, I have a lot to say on the subject, so I guess I know what I'm writing next.\
    Lanier saw the painting in a positive light and would compare it to a virtual reality, a beautiful garden of insane possibilities, where one could create anything conceivable. However, in his subsection "Paranoid Android" in the 5th chapter, Lanier describes his darker imaginings and how he came to fear the potential of virtual reality, this fear he calls the Thought. The Thought is really any thought path of his leading to anxiety or cybernetic-induced terror. It may just be "the creepiest technology ever". I would have to agree. I used to be a close-minded fool, arguing that science should just stop! Halt all work on "artificial intelligence". The computers are going to destroy us. A good friend of mine pointed out the delusions in my arguments after a long and heated discussion.You can't stop progress. Lanier mentions 2001: A Space Odyssey in this chapter, that movie was a trip. HAL is the perfect embodiment for all of my technological fears. "Paranoid Android" happens to be one my favorite Radiohead songs, a little unrelated, I know, but Jaron Lanier is my new favorite person. His cool factor is off the charts.\
    The man was born. His parents encouraged him to become a knowledge addict, an avid reader of books, a player of instruments, a dreamer of dreams, a builder of domes. His father actually allowed him to design the structure of their new home, as a teenager, with only minor interference. What they built together wasn't perfect, but boy was it weird and wonderful. Standing in the barren wasteland that is New Mexico, the main room was a geodesic dome that housed a father and his son just as well as it needed to and inspired Lanier on a daily basis. His wonderful mother passed away after a tragic car accident, but her grace and legacy lives on in her son. Jaron Lanier had helped build a house, graduated with a Bachelor's degree in mathematics and became a teaching assistant in graduate classes all by the age of seventeen. Wow. By the time I was seventeen, I was more concerned with texting than learning, already a slave to a kind of virtual reality. Thankfully, that's changed in a big way, but Jaron Lanier's amazing fulfilled potential doesn't have me feeling so great about myself! I'll muscle through it.\
    Lanier describes Silicon Valley. "Valley of unearthly delights.... Has there ever before been such an unaesthetic center of power and influence?" Although it pained him to do so, Lanier embraced a "lab rat" role when first starting his career in technology. He took on a job as a software developer for a video game company, but it was always VR that interested him the most. There were just no jobs in VR at the time. So what did he do? He made money. He was a slave to the man, but eventually, consumers bought into his ideas and everyone else became a slave to him, at least symbolically. We are all slaves to virtual reality. The internet is everything and human existence is already forever changed by a virtual reality, but Lanier saw potential for making the experience more immersive. After he was done being a lab rat, Lanier went on to start his own company that was the first to sell VR equipment. He popularized VR and is supposedly, as many call him, the father of the modern idea of VR.\
    Learning about Jaron Lanier's life and his successes and failures was a wonderful ride, but what really stuck with me after reading the book was how perfectly his mental dissonance is portrayed and how relatable that dissonance is. He walks a tightrope. "I realize I might seem schizophrenic to some readers. If you're a techie, you might wonder how I can spend so much time on downer warnings about how we're turning ourselves into zombies. If you're a humanist book lover, you might wonder how I can be a cheerleader for tech at the same time. It isn't easy to walk this particular tightrope, but we all have to learn to walk it if we're going to survive." This paragraph right here, was most profound to me. It's like he's describing me and my own journey through the confusing, dystopian undertones of the progresses of our times. Reading this book right before the repeal of net neutrality by the FCC has inspired me to keep chasing after my own dreams to become a philosophical techie genius, hell bent on fixing this bug-ridden mess of a world of ours. I hope and pray to the things behind the sun that it isn't already too late.






































































